5 months into the war in Gaza and deadly
chaos around an aid Convoy has glaringly
highlighted the desperation and climbing
death toll among
civilians the Carnage of
inhumanity is something we haven't seen
for decades my guest this week on
conflict zone is Nabil Fami former
Egyptian foreign minister and longtime
Diplomat at what point does Egypt have
no choice but to consider opening its
border to Gins on humanitarian grounds
have the shocking scenes of suffering
brought this conflict to an inflection
point nabami welcome to conflict Zone
thank you tragic deaths around an aid
Convoy in Northern Gaza have highlighted
the desperation of civilians for food
and the lack of security in The Enclave
after everything that you've seen in the
past days is it time for Egypt to open
its border to civilians from
Gaza the problem with opening the board
of civilians is this would be
participating in a premeditated
consistent effort by the Israelis to uh
decrease the density of Palestinians on
their own territory and it's something
which politically we will not do because
we support the Palestinian State side by
side with Israel uh we continue to take
Palestinians in need of medical
supervision or medical help uh we take
those but a large scale uh uh number of
Palestinians basically mean we're
playing into these many hands but you
know Egypt has certainly made that red
line quite clear that it will not accept
any forc displacement of Palestinians
but how do you balance the humanitarian
desperation I mean you know save the
children just out this past week saying
that we are quote witnessing a mass
killing of children in slow motion
because there is no more food left how
do you how do you balance that with your
red
lines it's an absolutely great question
uh we are in a very difficult situation
we cannot allow Palestinians to starve
we don't want them to be shot at at the
same time we don't want to be forced
into a position where we collaborate uh
indirectly with Israelis by by
decreasing the dens of Palestinians so
what we're doing is providing as much
assistance as we can through the Border
we had an air drop also just uh about 48
hours ago and we continue to host
negotiations with the Israelis and the
americ cies to try to deal with all
these issues but I guess my point is you
know at what point does Egypt have no
other choice morally than to open the
Border because you know we know this is
not a crisis of you're making but does
Egypt need to do more to help the people
on the
ground I think we are doing quite a bit
but yes I agree with you there will be a
situation where if they're forced AC
cross the border we will have to make
very difficult decision but how we
respond to we we clearly are not going
to kill Palestinians but that being said
uh it should not be interpreted as
meaning push them across the border and
we will acquest because pushing them
across the border is not only a
violation of Palestinian rights it's
also by the way a violation of the
Egyptian Israel peace
agreement and that will have
consequences yeah and um you know I'd
like to ask you a little bit about what
is happening right now on the ground at
the border because there's been a lot of
questions about that Egypt has been
building some sort of security Perimeter
at the border last month your foreign
minister classified it as what he called
maintenance on the border isn't Egypt
planning an area to house Palestinians
in case of an Israeli offensive on
Rafa in know honestly I don't
know exactly but let me tell you what I
do know the area where there is
construction was originally an area of
unlicensed buildings they were taken
down and people were moved out the
government rebuilt that area and invited
the Egyptians to go back to that area
they have not yet gone back to that area
and it's something has been going on for
over a year you had the the Gaza
breakout during the last five months so
the pressure also became uh what are we
going to do if the Palestinians are
forced across the board uh we will have
to deal with a very dire humanitarian
situation but we will also have to deal
with the situation where we will not in
any way directly or indirectly condone
Israel action that violates Palestinian
rights in that respect but also that
violates the Egyptian Israel peace
agreement and that needs to be clearly
understood yes so let me ask you a
little bit more about the diplomacy that
might be going on behind closed doors
right now because I mean Israel's
foreign minister has said that they have
to and I'm quoting here deal with Rafa
because they cannot just leave Haman
there um and that it would coordinate
with Egypt to address concerns about
refugees what conversations do you think
are happening right now between Egypt
and Israel especially when it comes to
you know potential incentives for
example I mean you know money and
incentives for Egypt to take refugees
wouldn't hurt would
it this is not an issue of money and
incentives this is an issue we are
committed to a two- State solution the
two state the Palestinian part of that
of the two states is Gaza and the West
Bank if we were to to reduce the numbers
there that would be very very dangerous
some isra politicians in the cabinet
have openly said yes we need to move
Palestinians out of Gaza uh into Egypt
or even into Europe and we'll find
financing to do that so that's their
declared policy we didn't make this up
uh but we have made it also clear that
we will not participate
in this process uh
and I can tell you that affects our
national security and that's a violation
of the Peace of taking it back to
getting Aid in um airdropping of Aid is
picking up even the United States has
joined in there are currently
discussions on how else to expand the
flow and you know it's been reported
that President Biden spoke last week
with President D CI about urgency of
negotiations and bringing more Aid into
Gaza I mean as Egypt your next
you're trying to get convoys in do you
see the potential of anything shifting
on the ground so that more Aid can
enter yes I do see if there's a hostage
a partial hostage change versus the
incarcerated and a temporary ceasefire
that will facilitate Aid going in uh the
re most recent incident that we saw uh
just two or three days ago this was Aid
action you brought in and organized by
Palestinians and Israelis but given that
it was a conflict Zone Israelis
themselves attacked the the group of
people who had gathered around uh the
the vehicles there so you can't have a
sustained uh substantial amount of Aid
going in in a war zone in a conflict
Zone there's no really pure secure area
so yes we want why are we hosting the
negotiations on ceasefire and H exchange
one of the reasons stop getting people
killed but also allow for more effective
humanitarian Aid right and just to pick
up on one thing that you said there I
mean the IDF has actually said that
indeed they did fire but they didn't
actually fire on individuals um who were
seeking to get aid but again there's
there's two sides of the story so I just
want to highlight that that's the the
perspective that they are bringing in in
the official statement um let's take it
back to the ceasefire talks because they
they were due at the time of this
interview they were due to kickoff um in
Cairo Egypt and Qatar have been
mediating between Israel and Hamas and
your foreign minister has said in the
past days that he's optimistic about a
temporary ceasefire being reached before
Ramadan what do you think that he sees
that might point to optimism for a
deal well again you have to ask Sam
himself but let me tell you what I think
he he means uh if you simply listen to
the
international uh
rhetoric everybody under everybody has
been telling the Israelis and Hamas
let's have a SE before Ramadan they're
worried about the situation on the
ground humanitarian and political but
they're also worried about it breaking
out beyond the borders uh in the states
uh on the on on Israel's borders so
there's also the threat of expansion uh
that's that is what I think we're seeing
now again
two points two caveats here one this is
not a full ceasefire nor a full hostage
exchange this is a partial hostage
exchange versus those incarcerated and a
temporary ceas so it will be a positive
step towards a complete ceasefire you're
not going to get resolution of the
conflict or an ability to start
rebuilding what has been destroyed
unless you get a complete seire as one
of the you know the the traditional
mediators between these parties um talk
with us a little bit about how you think
the pressure on those parties might be
right now because mean we have world
leaders speaking out loudly against um
the scenes of suffering right now in
Gaza even the US is real strongest Ally
seems frustrated do you see this as an
inflection point in the crisis do you
feel the mood could change the Dynamics
on the
ground again thank you for that question
I think it does but it's an inflection
point from either we we start a process
of trying to deal with the humanitarian
situation more substantially and
hopefully then the Pol the politics the
policies uh and the security situation
or the inflection point will be that it
we're going to move towards a highly
volatile Regional
context and I don't mean full-fledged
Arab Israeli Wars but I do mean
you see everything from tension in the r
sea to the Lebanese border to the Syrian
border stuff in Iraq what's happening
inside Gaza problems on our
border as well this is going to break
out of hand so the inflection point is
either we find a way to slow this
process down and try to resolve it or
it's going to break out beyond control
so you've made the bridge there
basically from the temporary ceasefire
talks now um to something a little bit
more longer termin there seems to be a
lot of Will and diplomatic momentum we
have to say from both Arab states and
Israel's allies including the US and the
UK to secure such a long-term lasting
peace that would indeed include a
two-state solution you know you you've
seen over many decades the all of the
previous efforts that have
failed is something different this
time
es the Carnage of inhumanity
is something we haven't seen for
decades it was always a horrible
incident in uh in inside Israel or among
Palestinian territories including
assassination of leaders by the way not
by the other side but by their own
people so we've seen that but to see
five
months 30,000 people killed at least
because there are those under the rubble
that we don't account for 70% of them
are women and children and children
starving we have not seen that in a very
long long time so that's something which
frankly I come from Egypt we were the
first to have a peace agreement with the
Israelis and that's almost 50 years
ago 50 years after the first peace
agreement with Israel to see not only
the lack of conclusion of comprehensive
peace completely but to see the level of
killing and and and and and and counter
violence is frankly quite shocking and
it it it really Burns in my gut as have
having been part of this process for so
long and as and as you are coming from
Egypt I'd like to ask you about um this
Saudi Le group of Arab states that
includes Egypt Jordan Qatar the UAE um
which is reportedly now pushing this
post-war plan that would include a
reformed Palestinian Authority governing
Gaza an irreversible path toward a
two-state solution from the perspective
of Arab diplomacy what could be offered
to sweeten the deal for Israel because I
mean you've highlighted the trauma of
these societies the the violence the
Bloodshed there's no appetite right now
for a two-state solution in Israel after
October
7th that that's why I mean when I let me
talk about what I think can be done
rather than what's on the table by the
Arab group because I don't know actually
how far they've gone uh I said crisis
and conflict we need to I'll give you 10
quick points in 10 seconds
ceasefire hostage exchange to
incarcerated humanitarian support uh
security Arrangements between
Palestinians and Israelis in Gaza
including a withdrawal of uh Israeli
forces uh a a
declaration uh recognizing inian State
based on 6967 Palestinian State under
occupation by the way I'm not saying
it's it's established Palestinian State
under occupation based 1967 a
reaffirmation by the Arab countries of
their Arab Beirut Summit where they said
they will all have relations with Israel
if there is uh uh an end of of
occupation I want to put all of
that under a security Council resolution
every one of these points by the way is
supported by all International
Community I want to have that adopted by
the by the security Council in an
affirmative vote and then we go to the
parties because that will also require
by the way elections in Israel elections
among Palestinians the establishment of
the new government then let me ask you
Palestinians yeah I mean it's it's you
know you're presenting here a plan but I
I I also want to ask you how you get
that plan done with the mood that is
currently on the ground the Israeli
cabinet right now has said that any
recognition of a Palestinian statehood
in the wake of the Hamas Terror attacks
on Israel on October 7th which as we
know killed 1,200 people um and 250 were
taken hostage they've said and I'm
quoting here it would give a huge reward
to unprecedented
terrorism what's your response to
that we're not dealing with one part of
the problem rather than the
other what I'm dealing here with is the
whole issue and I'm not actually asking
the Israelis and Palestinians to accept
it at the beginning what I'm saying is
that Us Egypt Russia China France UK you
name it we've all supported two states
of let's agree to this annotated
package and go with it to the Israelis
and Palestinians showing that that okay
you have a ceasefire you'll have secur
Israel has will have security
Palestinians will have a relief from
what's Happening you're going to have to
establish a new government the
Palestinians to deal with Gaza and the
West Bank so we're dealing with the
whole thing as to together and slowly
within a two-year period we can get
there if you go to the to the Arabs
today because I know this is probably on
your mind okay why can't the Arabs take
charge of Gaza and manage that and
provide security and that's a question
which Egyptians have been asked for
hundreds of times it's probably the most
illogical irresponsible question anybody
could think of because we will not be
surrogates of
Israelis I said they will preserve let
me just continue but
here's but I I just I need to follow up
with you on that because you know and
and ask you to actually respond to what
Israel has put forward theyve set out
this competing plan for postwar Gaza it
does not include a two-state solution it
does include overseeing Security in The
Enclave you you've talked about security
there um in fact Netanyahu says that
Israel should have security control over
the Philadelphia Corridor we know um
that's that border zone between Gaza and
Egypt do you see any circumstances
you've talked about coming together do
you see any circumstances under which
Egypt would be willing to accept
that absolutely not because that would
basically mean so what are the
Alternatives reoccupy from a security
perspective this is my point yeah let me
just let continue if you tell me that
this 10-point plan or eight whatever
number of points you want will
ultimately lead to a Palestinian State
down the road then you can get you you
can and it will not involve Israeli
security supervision over gas the Arab
states are definitely ready to help
rebuild not alone but they ready to help
rebuild and will help train and create
mechanisms for better Management in Gaza
with the West Bank but they're not going
to be surrogates of Israel security
there's absolutely no way that they
would accept that furthermore the reason
why I said it's irresponsible if we were
to put Egyptian forces or trainees in
them we have a peace agreement with the
Israelis and the Israelis intervene
militarily what do we do shoot
them we end up shooting Palestinians and
Israelis it's not going to happen you've
highlighted all the challenges but what
are the
Alternatives the alternative is give me
a structure for a plan and then we can
look at okay is is security managed by
an Arab International contingent or
International contingent Palestinian
contingent with Arab oversight the
details are are are plausible and we can
look at Creative Solutions but not
solutions that end up with the facto
Israeli occupation of guys that can't
happen but I I I look again we were the
first to sign a peace agreement with
Israel so that Israel wants security we
accept that and we're looking at ways to
achieve that but only based on you can't
have security unless you solve the
problem the problem is
occupation and Israelis want more
transparency and more effectivess on
security that we can that we can look at
provided that the principle of anic
occupation is there let's let's move on
because um you know Egypt has been also
part of this rethink of politics in in
Palestinians are Palestinian areas and
part of you know the plans for potential
governance um within Gaza itself how do
you see the prospects for fragmented
Palestinian politics to be able to unite
after the war because I mean the
Palestinian Authority president mmud
Abbas is looking set to stay in his
position along with his security Chiefs
do you think Palestinians will accept
that and that the PA might administer
Gaza he's widely unpopular let let me
put it this
way the only way to really administrate
Gaza in a way that's effective for
Palestinians and ultimately
also accepted by the Israelis uh without
occupation is to have a Palestinian
Palestinian a new
understanding uh whether we like it or
not Hamas had less support before
October 7th now they have more support
not because of what they did but because
of these ready reaction to to what they
did that has without a doubt eroded the
PA's Authority the PA's credibility
excuse me uh but we need to rebuild that
it may require new leaders I'm not
agnostic to that all I'm saying is that
yes you're you're hitting the the point
right on the on on the head we need to
get Palestinians to look for a new form
that's why I said we need elections and
we need a new technocratic government to
deal with both W back and guest there's
a big debate also raging right now about
whether or not um to what extent Hamas
should be involved in all of that um
Egypt for its part has acted as a
mediator between Hamas and its foes
Israel and fata as we've highlighted
it's also worked with Hamas in recent
years to counter an Islamic Insurgency
in the Sinai but you know for you
personally when you look at the
situation after the horrors of October
7th can they really be part of a
post-war
scenario again depends on the scenario
if it's a post-war scenario where we
continue to have cycles of violence
they'll be part of
there's no question they'll be party
because the asymmetrical balance even
though many countries around the world
consider them to be a terrorist
organization the United States the EU
Israel itself Listen to listen to me
carefully here I didn't say a postm
scenario where you have peace I said if
we continue to have a cycle of violence
they they they are others other forms of
Hamas will continue to exercise what
they pursue as their policies what I'm
putting forward
is
I want to rebuild a Palestinian
constituency that is effectively
supportive and persuant to a two-state
solution if parties don't want to accept
that then frankly they can't qualify
themselves be part of that process if
they do they will have to change and
let's also be cynically candid if you
want who are we negotiating with now the
PA they get the to change who is Israel
negotiating with Now who is the US nego
with now who is it nice question for you
it's
ham so they are there my issue is not
whether they're there or not they are
there my issue is how do I build a a a a
scenario that allows for Egyptian for
Arab isra peace including Palestinian
isra peace those who don't want peace we
will then work against but frankly uh on
on the one hand we're being asked to
talk to Hames whose relations with Egypt
were always very very careful uh but
we're asked to talk to them now and then
we hear but they're not part of the
Paradigm well okay so who should we talk
to so then I mean you know when you look
at all of the
scenarios that are possible coming out
of this first of all how do you think
the war in Gaza ends and when do you see
it
ending
uh do you think you'll see a permanent
end to this conflict anytime soon I
don't I don't I don't think you'll see a
shortterm complete ending you will
probably find get one hostage agreement
temporary ceasefire and then
another uh but then you will have
outbreaks from the agreement and a
regression uh neither side really is
ready to make a strategic decision be
that the the Israelis or Hamas uh and
that's the that is what is required
that's
why at the beginning I said let's put
together a package that we outside the
region out we we beyond the parties
except and then we start talking to the
parties their
center to see if we can sell this piece
me I I I agree with you the sentiment
today is not for a two-state solution
but actually it's the only one that will
get them out of this
process as a former negotiator do I
think I can go and and do it tomorrow of
course not and if a two-state solution
cannot be reached then what I mean what
realistic alternative do you see to a
two-state solution that can provide
peace in the region or is there none uh
there there is none what the other
alternative is a one-state reality which
will be a continuous conflict between
Palestinians and Israelis because they
both want national identity on a very
small piece of land and neither side
will give it up completely to the other
furthermore uh if you don't allow them
equal rights you will have conflicts
within the one state so a two-state
solution is extremely difficult a one
state solution is completely
impossible it is a one- state reality of
contined conflict n um we have
unfortunately run out of time we thank
you so much for joining us here on
conflict Zone thank you for your time
thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
a
[Music]